Asking Questions workshop (#84)
CodeYourFuture/CYF-Workshops: asking-questions/readme.md

# Asking Questions 101

## Prep

- [ ] Read this article about [Mental Models](https://jamesclear.com/mental-models)

> - [ ] Load this webpage, which stores the problems we will work on today. [https://cyf-workshops.netlify.app/asking-questions](asking-questions)

Reviewer: This is 404ing for me - just checking you're going to deploy this once this PR goes through

Author: https://deploy-preview-84--cyf-workshops.netlify.app/asking-questions/

Today we're going to start learning a formal language of developer questions. We will begin with this basic format:

1. What I _did_
1. What I _expected_
1. What actually _happened_

This format helps to find the discrepancies between expectations and reality. (This is the gap in our understanding.)

It's also an efficient way to share our current understanding with others.

## Expectation vs reality

When we are surprised by an outcome it usually means we had a mental model of the world that didn't predict the world accurately. To develop our understanding of coding, we will:

### Predict

> 1. Build a model in our mind (a "mental model" or understanding)

Reviewer: I'm leaning into use of the word "explanation" here as I think it is a more concrete way of talking about exercising an existing mental model.

1. Play computer - "run" the model and _predict_ (say before) what the outcome will be

### Try

1. Code our model
1. Run the code

### Compare and Update

1. Compare the outcome with our prediction

> 1. Update our understanding, or update our code

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Explain the gap between our prediction and what actually happened
2. Update our understanding
```

This process is cyclical.

```mermaid
graph LR
   A[Predict]
   B[Try]

>    C[Compare]

Reviewer: Add another node referring to explanation.

   D[Update]
   A --> B
   B --> C
   C --> D
   D --> A
```

## Updating the _right_ model

When we ask questions, we need to share our perspective with others so together we can test the right thing, focus on the mis-understanding or mistake, and get quickly to a shared understanding of your specific problem. Let's look at an example.

> <!--{{<note type="activity" title="Inversion, 5m" >}}-->

Author: They will magically appear on the front end aye.

1. Set a [timer for 5 minutes](https://www.google.com/search?q=timer+for+10+minutes).
2. Popcorn around the room and each person give an example of a bad way to ask a question until the timer goes off. For example:

> Argh I can't make it work please help me!

<!--{{</note>}}-->

### Why are these not useful?

<!--{{<note type="activity" title="Inversion 2, 10m" >}}-->

1.  Set a [timer for 10 minutes](https://www.google.com/search?q=timer+for+10+minutes).
2.  Popcorn around the room and each person give a reason the previous question was bad until the timer goes off. For example:

    > What is _it_? What are you trying to do? In what way is it not working? Be specific! Share what you see. Do you have a link? What do you want it to do?

    <!--{{</note>}}-->

### Let's just set some ground rules here:

1. The goal is not to complete the exercise; the goal is to _learn_
1. The smart thing to do is to focus on the questions you cannot (yet) answer

<!--{{<note type="activity" title="Framing questions systematically, 30m" >}}-->

Split into groups of 2-5 people.
Set a whole class timer for 30 minutes.

### Confound yourselves

- Pick a problem from the bank.

> - As a group, make a prediction about what you think the answer is, and write it down.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- As a group, explain and predict what you think the answer is, and write it down.
```

- Test your prediction. (Try it out.)
- Compare your prediction with the outcome.

> What happened? Is there a gap in your understanding?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What happened? Is there a gap in your understanding?
Can you come up with a different explanation to account for this gap?
```
